>> [BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>GEOGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
And our special guests today
will be John Martineau.
He's a British philosopher
and a publisher,
including his book "A
Little Book of Coincidence
in the Solar System."
John, welcome to the show.
>>JOHN MARTINEAU: Thanks
very much for having me.
>>NOORY: How did you get
interested in the solar system?
Tell me a little
bit more about you.
>>MARTINEAU: Right.
That really begins
with my grandfather,
who's called Anthony Ashton.
And he was very interested
in the anthropic principle,
as it was then known
in the 1970s, which
was when the problem of
the finely tuned universe
first came along.
And I went to live in
Wales, quite near to him,
and we used to go and
walk the dogs every day
on the Welsh borders.
And he would describe
this problem to me.
And I became quite hooked
and very interested in it.
>>NOORY: He was a genius.
>>MARTINEAU: He was just
following the work of others
really, but he had
some ideas of his own
which I think I've been
able to develop slightly.
>>NOORY: Now, I'm not a
believer in coincidence.
I think everything
happens for a reason.
And you do too, don't you?
>>MARTINEAU: Yes, I
think coincidences is
a much maligned word actually.
If you think about it, science
is built on coincidences.
So if something happens once,
no one takes any notice.
If it happens twice,
three times, four times,
then you've got a pattern.
And science is the study
of patterns in nature.
And a coincidence
is simply two things
happening at the beginning
of a pattern, if you like.
So it's one of those words that,
if you really think about it,
it's got a lot more embedded in
it than it's throwaway meaning.
>>NOORY: John, tell us a
little bit about your "Book
of Coincidence."
>>MARTINEAU: My "Little
Book of Coincidence"
which was published in 2001
now, quite a long time ago,
was simply an attempt to look
at the geometry and harmony
of the solar system.
I'd seen a plate in a book by
a chap called Joachim Schultze.
And he published a picture
of the motions of Venus
around the Earth, this
lovely pentagonal picture
which I think we may
be coming to later.
And I was really taken by it.
And I decided to
study it some more,
try and find out what other
geometries and harmonies there
were in the solar system.
And I eventually
published all my findings
in this book, "Little
Book of Coincidence
in the Solar System."
Some of the things I
discovered at that time
are now very well
understood, particularly
with the recent discoveries of
lots of other solar systems,
exoplanetary solar systems.
>>NOORY: And they're all
the same, aren't they?
>>MARTINEAU: They've all
got these resonances.
In fact, resonances
seems to be built in.
But the particular ones that
we've got going around Earth
are very, very special.
And that's one of the
things that I've carried on
with looking at in my work.
And there are other
things, I think,
that presently my "Little
Book of Coincidences"
have not been explained.
And I hope you will be able to
talk about those a little bit
more in this program.
>>NOORY: Why is geometry
so important in the scheme
of things?
>>MARTINEAU: Well, that's
a very good question.
My publishing
house, Wooden Books,
we've been publishing the
seven liberal arts, all seven
of the seven liberal
arts, in two volumes
now for a few years.
We just last year
published the "Trivium,"
which is logic, rhetoric,
grammar, poetic meter,
and form.
And the book we did before
that was called "Quadrivium."
And that was the book on
numbered geometry, harmony,
and my contribution on
geometry and harmony
in the solar system.
If we go back to
the ancient Greeks,
and we look at why they thought
these subjects were important,
you can see that they were
called the liberal arts
because they were supposed to
liberate a person, as opposed
to the servile arts which
had a function, if you like.
So servile arts might have been
something like accountancy.
Or anything that had a
real use in the world
was one of the servile arts.
But liberal arts alone
have no real use,
as such, according to the
Greeks were seeing it any way.
They are, in fact, quite
useful for building things.
But essentially, they help you
understand the way that number
operates in the world.
So particularly with
geometry, you've
got the fact that number
in space is geometry,
and you've number
in time as harmony.
>>NOORY: There seems to be so
much order to the universe.
That's what baffles me--
how the principles stay the
same throughout the entire--
I mean, the order
of the universe
is absolutely brilliant.
Who developed this?
>>MARTINEAU: The order of the
universe is quite brilliant.
The thing about the
order of our universe
is that it is
very, very special.
That brings us on to the--
>>NOORY: Unique or special?
>>MARTINEAU: Well, it is
unique because we have only
got the one universe to study.
But it is also doubly special.
And what scientists began
to realize in the 1970s,
particularly with the
publication of a book
called "The Cosmological
Anthropic Principle,"
an early work by a chap
called Brandon Carter,
was that our universe is
very, very, very finely tuned
to optimize the chances
for biological life.
And the more scientists
have looked at the universe,
the more eerie and strange
this fine tuning has seemed.
To begin with, people thought
they could just explain it away
as a series of coincidences.
But now, and particularly in the
last 15 years as more and more
and more of these fine
tunings have been discovered,
it begs the question of what's
caused these fine tunings.
How did our universe come
into being absolutely,
completely, and utterly
optimized all of its dials
fine-tuned.
>>NOORY: Would you
say it's perfect?
>>MARTINEAU: It is pretty much
as perfect as you can get it.
And you can show
lots of examples
where if you fiddle
with any of the dials,
you increase the
mass of the electron
or reduce the force of
gravity slightly or change
any of nature's
constants in any way
really, that life as we know
it just really couldn't exist.
And it's not even that you
could get a universe really
where very much happens at all.
You might get no chemistry.
You'd have only hydrogen
or helium or just
a universe of millions
of black holes.
>>NOORY: We've got it all.
>>MARTINEAU: It is
so finely tuned.
Some of these parameters,
if you change them
by a factor of naught point--
.000000000001, nothing works.
They're really, really,
really, finely tuned.
Others have a range
that they work within.
>>NOORY: Let's find out a
little bit more about this.
>>MARTINEAU: Yes.
>> From galaxies and stars,
down to atoms and subatomic
particles, the very structure
of our universe is determined
by these numbers.
These are the fundamental
constants and quantities
of the universe.
Scientists have come to
the shocking realization
that each of these
numbers has been carefully
dialed to an astonishingly
precise value, a value that
falls within an exceedingly
narrow, life-permitting range.
If any one of these numbers
were altered by even a hair's
breadth, no physical
interactive life of any kind
could exist anywhere.
There'd be no stars, no life,
no planets, no chemistry.
Consider gravity, for example.
The force of gravity
is determined
by the gravitational constant.
If this constant varied by
just 1 in 10 to the 60th parts,
none of us would exist.
To understand how exceedingly
narrow this life permitting
range is, imagine a dial divided
into 10 to the 60th increments.
To get a handle on how many
tiny points on the dial
this is, compare it to the
number of cells in your body
or the number of seconds that
have ticked by since time
began.
If the gravitational
constant had been out of tune
by just one of these
infinitesimally small
increments, the universe
would either have expanded
and thinned out so rapidly
that no stars could form
and life couldn't
exist, or it would
have collapsed back on
itself with the same result--
no stars, no
planets, and no life.
Or consider the expansion
rate of the universe.
This is driven by the
cosmological constant.
A change in its value by a mere
1 part in 10 to the 120th parts
would cause the
universe to expand
too rapidly or too slowly.
In either case, the
universe would, again,
be life-prohibiting.
Or another example
of fine tuning--
if the mass and energy
of the early universe
were not evenly distributed to
an incomprehensible precision
of 1 part in 10 to
the 10 to the 123rd,
the universe would be
hostile to life of any kind.
The fact is, our
universe permits
physical interactive
life only because these
and many other numbers have been
independently and exquisitely
balanced on a razor's edge.
>>NOORY: John, what are
the odds of that happening?
>>MARTINEAU: That was a
great clip, by the way.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>MARTINEAU: They are
really, really small.
The latest book on
the subject, which
is co-authored by
Geraint and Luke Barnes,
fantastic book published by
Cambridge University Press,
you just get the
sense of this thing
being almost
impossibly unlikely.
>>NOORY: It's unbelievable.
>>MARTINEAU: It's unbelievable.
It is beyond belief,
it really is.
Which then brings us to the
question of how it's achieved.
How come?
How does this come about?
>>NOORY: Because this
is not an accident.
This is not random.
>>MARTINEAU: It's clearly
something going on here.
Some people think it is a
combination of randomness
and infinity.
>>NOORY: I can't accept that.
>>MARTINEAU: No, but it's
the standard response.
The problem is what they
call the multiverse.
And there are various
different kinds of multiverses.
Some are linear, and
they go on forever.
Some universes have babies.
Others pop out of a sort of
bathtub and they all connect.
But essentially, the
idea with those solutions
to the problem of all
this beautiful fine tuning
is that you've just gotten an
infinite number of universes.
And of course, we
live in the one
where it's all
very, very perfect.
As I hope to show in a
moment, that doesn't really
hold water when
we look at what's
going on around the Earth.
Because although for life,
there's a necessary--
>>NOORY: Ingredients.
>>MARTINEAU:
--necessary conditions,
what we see going around
the Earth is not necessary,
but it still appears finely
tuned for beauty, in fact.
And then there are all sorts of
other solutions to the problem
as well, which range from Elon
Musk's favorite belief on this
is that we live in a simulation.
So the reason
everything looks so
beautiful is that it's
essentially a simulation.
>>NOORY: But who's
the simulator?
>>MARTINEAU: Exactly.
You get back to the problem
of who's the designer?
Who's done it?
Aliens built it is another
one, another big thing.
>>NOORY: And who built them?
>>MARTINEAU: Who built them?
Where did they come from?
And then you've
got the God did it.
But if he did it,
how did he do it?
>>NOORY: And who built God?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Always
was, always will be,
that's what my
mother used to say.
And I used to say, Mom,
that's not an answer.
>>MARTINEAU: That's right.
None of them are really answers.
And we are in this
very interesting point
in cosmology at the moment
that a lot of the cosmologists
don't really want to talk about.
But it has real echoes
of a particular period
in the previous
cosmological journey
that mankind took in the
medieval period, where
the theologians of the
day, i.e. the scientists,
would argue about
the number of angels
that could dance on a pinhead.
And these debates were
taken very, very seriously.
And the greatest
minds of the day
then would discuss these things.
We have exactly the
same problem now
that our greatest
thinkers are all
coming up with these
extraordinary ideas, very few
of which--
in fact, none of
which-- can ever
be tested, which we are
all asked to believe in.
In fact, they don't even
agree with one another,
because each scientist has their
own pet theory, none of which
can be tested.
So we're in a very interesting
period in cosmology.
And I hope to be able to
show a way through this
or another take on it.
>>NOORY: What does
your gut tell you?
>>MARTINEAU: Well, that
maybe brings us to the Earth.
And what I did
when I was studying
this subject was
begin to notice--
it was a result of my "Little
Book of Coincidence," which
I really only wrote to
complete the seven books,
the liberal arts project.
But there's certain things
in that journey that really
stuck out like a sore thumb and
made me really scratch my head
and think, what on
Earth is going on here?
And they didn't really
fit in with any kind
of necessary thing.
The first one of those
was this Venus thing
that I touched on before.
And the odd thing about Venus
is she's our closest planet.
She's got the very,
very circular orbit.
So it's not like
anything's really
seems to have disturbed her.
>>NOORY: She's too hot.
>>MARTINEAU: She
spins the opposite way
to all the other bodies
in the solar system.
And yeah, it's a pretty
nasty place to try and live.
But the extraordinary
thing about Venus
is that she goes around
the Earth in a pattern that
is a five-fold pattern.
So the pattern of Venus's
conjunctions around the Earth
draw this beautiful rose-like
figure around the Earth.
And she does it
over eight years.
And the reason you get a
five, in fact, with Venus--
a five-fold pattern
around the Earth--
is because of an 8-13
resonance between the periods
of Venus and the Earth.
>>NOORY: And without that number
it wouldn't happen, would it?
>>MARTINEAU: That's right.
If Venus and the Earth weren't
in an 8-13 resonance, then
you wouldn't get this 5.
And in fact, even though it's
a very quite tight resonance,
it's not really well studied
or examined by scientists.
They prefer to look at
the 5-to-2 resonance
between Jupiter and Saturn.
>>NOORY: And what
does that mean, John,
when you talk about--
>>MARTINEAU: When
you've a resonance,
it means for every five
times one planet goes around
the sun--
so for Jupiter and Saturn,
for every five times
that Jupiter goes around the
sun, Saturn's gone round twice.
So with an 8-13 resonance,
we've got for every 13 times
Venus has gone around
the sun, Earth's done 8.
>>NOORY: We go 8.
>>MARTINEAU: And that's why
that 8-13, the number you
get in the petals as
viewed from Earth,
the number of the
conjunctions, is
the difference in the harmony.
>>NOORY: And what
if it was 9-13?
>>MARTINEAU: If it was
9-13, you'd get a 4,
because the difference
between 9 and 13 is 4.
So you'd get 4 petals.
But the really interesting thing
about this choice of numbers
is that they're all
Fibonacci numbers.
So our solar system is
full of Fibonacci numbers.
And Fibonacci numbers
are very interesting,
because they're the numbers
that build life on Earth.
So take an example, if you count
the spirals on a pineapple,
you'll get 5, 8, and
13 spirals, depending
on which angle of slope
of a spiral you can count.
Take another example.
Human beings we have 5 teeth
in each corner of our mouth.
As kids, our infant teeth--
>>NOORY: We should.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah,
they come out.
And then you get 8 teeth in
each corner of your mouth.
And that means
you've got 13 teeth
in each corner of your mouth.
Your teeth have gone 5, 8, 13.
All the plants around
you are doing 5, 8, 13.
>>NOORY: How can this be?
>>MARTINEAU: Life's
all doing 5, 8, 13.
And then the really
strange thing
is that our closest
planet is doing 5, 8, 13.
Why would our closest
planet do 5, 8, 13 as well?
It shouldn't be.
It's a very strange coincidence.
There's no reason
that you should
get the same numbers
being danced out
by your closest planet as the
prevailing numbers that fit.
>>NOORY: Someone has designed
this for a specific reason.
>>MARTINEAU: It looks uncanny.
It's something very
strange going on with it.
>>NOORY: How can
they say it's random?
>>MARTINEAU: Because
there's no causal mechanism
known to science that
could bring that about.
So for me, the Venus thing
is a double coincidence.
First of all, you've got
a very beautiful Fibonacci
resonance going on, which
in itself is interesting.
But the fact you've
got that going on
around the only planet
of biological life
that embodies those same
numbers is a double coincidence.
And the double coincidences are
where they start to stack up.
Another example of double
coincidences, for me,
is the simple fact that
the sun and moon appear
the same size in the sky.
It's one of those really--
>>NOORY: That's true.
>>MARTINEAU: --obvious facts.
You see that during an eclipse.
>>NOORY: You're right.
They look like quarters.
>>MARTINEAU: They're
exactly the same size.
They are really,
really the same size.
They weren't always
the same size.
In the time of the
dinosaurs, the moon
was closer to the Earth.
And she's been moving
further out as time gone by.
>>NOORY: Inches
at a stage, right?
>>MARTINEAU: That's right.
But right now, at
exactly this time
when there are lots of
thinking, sentient beings
on Earth with
telescopes and eyes
and brains to think about it,
we live in a particular epoch
where we've got a sun
and moon the same size.
I think that's a double
coincidence, because it's not
only a coincidence
that we see it,
but it's a coincidence that we
see it now, when we're here.
So it's a very
interesting thing.
And again, it's one
of those things,
you thought, well, that's just
got to be chance, hasn't it?
There's can't be any--
how could you
possibly pull it off
that you get a sun and moon
the same size at exactly
the same time that there's
a whole sentient species
on the Earth--
>>NOORY: It's not chance.
>>MARTINEAU: --to look at it.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: You've got a
trailer from a movie based
on your book.
>>MARTINEAU: That's right.
That's a movie that
never got made.
So I'm very happy to
share it with you.
>>NOORY: But we
have the trailer.
Let's look at it.
>>MARTINEAU: You've got some
bits from the trailer, yeah.
>> But what we are about to show
you is the fact that few modern
scientists are even aware of
let alone able to explain.
Yet it is something well known
to their ancient colleagues
and one of the most amazing
coincidences conceivable.
Seen from the modern viewpoint,
the planets of the solar system
orbit the sun.
However, we do not
live on the sun.
We live here, on Earth.
And when we look towards
the sun from Earth,
what we actually see are
the inner planets, Mercury
and Venus, whizzing
around the sun as the sun
moves across the stars.
The sun is not the center
of our observations.
The Earth is.
Does it not strike
you as odd to discover
that, as seen from Earth, our
closest neighbor, Venus, draws
a huge fivefold rosette in
space around us in eight yards,
or 13 Venusian years?
Remember that most
plants on Earth
use the numbers 5, 8, and 13.
Well, our closest
neighbor is massively
beating out exactly these same
three numbers in space and time
around us.
This diagram was known to Kepler
and other astronomers hundreds,
even thousands, of years ago.
Yet, it does not appear in
any modern astronomy book.
In antiquity, there
was a concept known
as the harmony of the spheres--
also a parallel notion
of as above, so below--
used by architects to
bring cosmic proportions
into their buildings.
Today, both traditions
have been largely replaced
by beautiful complex
equations which perfectly
describe the heavenly
motions and create computer
models of their possessions.
Yet there are many simple
ways of understanding
the planetary orbits,
which are much more
practical and sensible for
everyday designers, artists,
builders, and musicians.
We have just seen what
Venus does around Earth.
Did you also know that each
time you pick up three, glasses
or push three oranges
together, you're
drawing the average orbits of
the first two planets, Mercury
and Venus--
or that our two
neighbors, Venus and Mars,
play out a beautiful
3-to-4 rhythm
in their close approaches to us?
Has anyone ever told you
that Mercury plays a waltz
all by itself, for one
Mercury day is two Mercury
years, during which time
it is spun on its own axis
exactly three times.
There are many more examples.
Yet few of these resonances are
understood by modern science.
So they're not taught in school.
And few people
today see the beauty
or hear the music
of the spheres.
>>NOORY: John, how
long did it take
you to decipher them and
come up with those formulas?
>>MARTINEAU: It
took a bit of time.
>>NOORY: I would think so.
>>MARTINEAU: I was
working on that.
I mean, that's
quite old stuff now.
Some of that's even
slightly out of date,
because scientists do understand
some of these resonances now.
But they don't understand
other bits of it.
But yeah it's been
a long journey.
And the journey is not over yet.
>>NOORY: No.
Now, tell me the significance--
when you say one Mercury this,
one Mercury-- what
does that mean to us--
to a guy who doesn't
know anything about this.
>>MARTINEAU: Well,
what you've really
got there is you've got a
kind of form of tidal locking,
in fact, going on.
But it's also music.
What you're really
hearing is music.
So 1-to-2 is an octave.
>>NOORY: Is it a rhythm?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
It's a rhythm and an octave.
So like that's a waltz.
1-to-2-to-3, you've got
an octave and fifth going
on there, a musical
fifth. (SINGING) Baa, baa,
black sheep.
And you've got a waltz in there.
>>NOORY: So you're seeing
the planets do that too?
>>MARTINEAU: It really is
the music of the spheres.
The Greeks were right about
this a lot a long time ago.
And in fact, in most of
the exoplanetary systems
that the science
has been looking at,
they're finding these
resonances everywhere now.
So one of the things
I did, in fact,
was recently I keyed in all
of the exoplanetary systems
I could get data for, which
is quite a lot of them.
>>NOORY: You could write
a symphony from this.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
You could do a
symphony from it, yeah.
>>NOORY: It would
be interesting.
>>MARTINEAU: And I looked
to see how many of them
I could find with
Fibonacci numbers as well.
And there weren't
very many out there.
So this thing going around
the Earth is doubly strange.
>>NOORY: What is the
importance of this order?
Because somewhere
along the line there's
got to be a reason for this--
what do you think
that reason is?
>>MARTINEAU: So we've
got this Venus thing
going on around the Earth that
really shouldn't be there.
It's very beautiful,
very meaningful, the fact
our closest planet is doing the
same thing is all the plants.
It doesn't go on anywhere
else in the solar system
I could find it.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>MARTINEAU: And then we got
our sun and moon the same size
in the sky which is--
>>NOORY: Weird.
>>MARTINEAU: --very weird
and meaningful and lovely bit
of symmetry, shouldn't be
there, doesn't need to be there.
>>NOORY: But it is.
>>MARTINEAU: But it is.
And then another thing I
discovered a few years ago
was this strange thing about
ice halos, which you must see
quite a lot of here in Boulder.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I bet.
>>MARTINEAU: It's
these beautiful things
where you get a
couple of rainbows
around the sun on an icy day.
And I discovered a
couple of years ago,
my most recent discovery in
this vein, that the two rainbows
you see around the sun, which
are known as the 22 degree
halo and the 46
degree halo, exactly
show you where mercury
and Venus's mean orbits
are around the sun.
So when you see some sun dogs--
each side of the sun--
that's Mercury's mean orbit.
You're actually looking at it
drawn for you as a rainbow.
>>NOORY: As a picture.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah, as a
picture, exactly really right.
If you could see Mercury
as a glittering object,
it would be exactly
where the sun--
>>NOORY: Is somebody trying
to tell us something?
>>MARTINEAU: And
then Venus, which
is 46 degrees from the sun.
Venus is very circular.
Where that second halo
appears-- sorry to wave
my arms around-- where
that second halo appears
is exactly where
Venus's orbit is.
So what's the chances of that?
You've got our closest
planet doing the same numbers
as life on Earth.
We've got the only two
circles in the sky--
the sun and the moon--
the same size.
And we've got the
only other two circles
we ever see in the sky, which
are these two ice halos,
exactly mapping onto the orbits
of the two inner planets.
It's really deeply,
deeply strange.
It shouldn't be there.
None of this should be there.
>>NOORY: But it is.
>>MARTINEAU: But it is.
So this just really brings
you closer to maybe wondering
what's going on.
And what it begins to do, if you
take these things seriously--
these coincidences
that are going on
around a planet of
conscious observers
like ourselves-- is
it makes you realize
that some of these other
solutions to the fine tuning
problem can't be true, because
they wouldn't explain this.
Because this idea of
randomness and infinity
that's pedalled as the solution
to the fine tuning problem--
>>NOORY: Which you
and I don't accept.
>>MARTINEAU: We don't
accept it anyway.
And nor does, in fact,
quite a lot of scientists.
Stephen Hawkings never liked
it because it's unprovable.
It defies Occam's razor.
You're inventing lots
of stuff you can never
see to solve a problem.
But in fact, according
to these people,
our own solar system
is so unlikely anyway.
The idea that it
would be unlikely
and also produces extra stuff
that you don't even need,
means that it can't just be
randomness and infinity that's
the solution.
Something else is going on.
>>NOORY: What are you saying?
>>MARTINEAU: Well, this is
where we introduce maybe John
Wheeler and John Wheeler's
participatory anthropic
principle.
Wheeler, who took over
Einstein's chair at Princeton,
towards the end of
his life started
to look at this problem.
And he came up with this idea
of a participatory anthropic
principle, or the idea that
observers had something
to do with the fine tuning.
So he was really saying that--
>>NOORY: The observer being who?
Us?
>>MARTINEAU: Being us, yes.
Wheeler's really saying all
you really need is observers
and then you can
get the fine tuning.
It's quite an interesting--
it's quite a difficult thing
to explain.
But let's just go through it.
>>NOORY: Well, let's look at
the Wheeler interview, OK?
>>MARTINEAU: Let's look
at a Wheeler interview.
>>NOORY: And that will
make a little sense.
>>MARTINEAU: What a treat.
>>JOHN WHEELER: As a picture
to inspire a thought,
it doesn't record an
experiment or a formula.
There is the letter U. The
U starts with a thin stem,
the beginning of the universe.
At the beginning, the
universe is small.
This stemmed U gets
fatter as we go up
to this side of the letter.
And at a certain point, it's
terminated by a big circle.
And there, there's an I sitting.
And that I is looking back to
the first days of the universe.
We ourselves can
get radiation today,
and do get radiation today,
from the very early days
of the universe.
But insofar as the
active observation
has anything to do with what
we do when we ascribe reality
to what we see, then we can say
this observer, who was brought
into existence of the universe,
has by his acts of observation
a part in bringing that
universe itself into being.
>>MARTINEAU: What a treat.
>>NOORY: He's not
around to explain
what he was talking about.
>>MARTINEAU: No.
Let's unpack it a bit.
So Wheeler took over
Einstein's chair in relativity.
He also worked with Niels Bohr.
He was the last guy to really--
>>NOORY: Of the true physicists.
>>MARTINEAU: The true
physicists of that era
that weren't scared to
think outside the box.
And what he's really
saying in a nutshell is--
let's think of it in
Einsteinian terms.
He's talking about light.
So we know that we live in
something called spacetime post
Einstein.
And essentially all
that really means
is that the faster you
move through space,
the slower you move through
time and vice versa.
If I stay still, I'm moving
through time at full speed.
Now, the thing that moves the
fastest through space is light.
And in fact, light
moves through space
at the speed of
light, which means
it doesn't experience any time.
So a photon that's emitted at
the beginning of the universe
from a very distant star
that hits my eyeball
hasn't experienced
any time at all.
It's under then
quantum mechanics,
the other bit of the story.
The act of observing
this piece of starlight
collapses the wave function
back then in that star.
So Wheeler's famous quote is
we're not only participators
in the here and now, but also
in the far away and long ago.
So he's really he's
really painting
a picture of a universe that's
far more squishy time-wise
and is much more temporally
caused than we liked to think.
And if we also
then take the idea
that electromagnetic
fields themselves
are the very stuff
of consciousness,
then we really begin to
see maybe what's going on,
which may be something
more far stranger,
more conscious, and more
retro temporally caused
than most of the
current theories
would currently propose.
>>NOORY: It seems, John,
that physicists are basically
saying that there's some
kind of pattern and order
in the universe that is unique.
And somehow they're bringing
human beings into the picture?
>>MARTINEAU: Mm-hmm.
>>NOORY: What do we
have to do with it?
What did we do?
>>MARTINEAU: Well,
Wheeler's saying observers--
do you remember "The
Hitchhiker's Guide
to the Galaxy" and the--
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>MARTINEAU: --that
thing they had
called the infinite
improbability drive.
And it was infinitely
improbable,
but it's still that you
got the best outcome.
So it collapses to
the best outcome.
The best universe is just
what's going to happen,
according to Wheeler.
Because the best universe is
going to have observers in it.
>>NOORY: Which could be us.
>>MARTINEAU: Which is us.
This is the best
possible universe.
They can't find another
one that's as stable
and does as many
interesting things,
however you turn these dials.
It's not that there are
millions of other dead, lifeless
universes with dials
spun to the wrong things.
You're just going
to get the best one.
And this is where
Wheeler's work lies.
And one thing that I think
is interesting about this way
of looking at it is that you
can extend Wheeler's theory
and say, well, if observers
can collapse the whole universe
into the best
universe, then what
happens around a planet of
conscious observers like us?
Well, according to
this theory, which
I'm calling the local
anthropic principle,
we're just localizing--
>>NOORY: Is this your theory?
>>MARTINEAU: This
is my theory, yes,
the local anthropic principle.
If Wheeler's right and observers
can do this to the universe,
then let's extend his
theory just to the local
and say, well, around planets
of conscious observers,
you're going to see all sorts
of really odd, beautiful things.
Well, what do we
find around Earth?
Lots of very odd, beautiful
things that shouldn't be there.
And we can make a prediction
from this theory as well.
We can say, well,
we would also expect
to find lots of very
odd and beautiful things
around other planets
of conscious observers.
And so that was when
I thought, well, OK,
that's a prediction theory.
Can I test this
theory in any way?
Of course, we haven't
found any other planets
of conscious observers yet.
But a couple of
years ago, they did
discover a very
interesting planetary
system called TRAPPIST.
And Google changed its logo
to the TRAPPIST system.
What's interesting
about TRAPPIST is that--
or what was immediately
interesting about TRAPPIST
is that it has four planets
in a habitable zone.
They're all big planets,
Earth-sized planets.
There orbiting very close to
this little white dwarf star.
And they all appear about
as big as the moon does,
these planets, in the sky.
And NASA then named this as
the number one habitable zone
destination.
>>NOORY: In the
Goldilocks, right?
>>MARTINEAU: In the
whole thing, yeah.
If NASA had to build a
rocket right now and send it
anywhere expecting
to find life--
>>NOORY: They'd go there.
>>MARTINEAU: --they'd go to
TRAPPIST, the TRAPPIST system.
So according to my theory, you'd
expect to find lots of fives
and golden sections and
lovely Fibonacci numbers.
And what do we find when
we look at TRAPPIST?
We find lots of Fibs.
In fact, the entire--
>>NOORY: Just like
you predicted.
>>MARTINEAU: --the
entire solar system's
built on Fibonacci numbers.
>>NOORY: Does that tell
you there is life there?
Or a high probability?
>>MARTINEAU: Under
my theory, we've
got NASA saying that's
where they'd go for life.
And unlike any other
system I've ever looked at,
you've also got these
Fibonacci numbers,
which would tend to indicate
that Wheeler's theory is right.
If there is life
there, it's also
kind of got this
fingerprint of life
that our solar system's got.
>>NOORY: But you're
saying life could
be predicted in the
universe based on geometry?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah, based
on incredibly unlikely
beautiful things going on around
them if this theory is right.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>MARTINEAU: So there's a
kind of fingerprint of life.
And life is able to warp
reality, if you like,
around it.
>>NOORY: How do you test
your theory though, John?
>>MARTINEAU: We won't.
Until we find another planet
of conscious observers,
we won't know.
>>NOORY: You can't.
>>MARTINEAU: We won't know.
>>NOORY: Is that
frustrating for you?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
Well, it may not be, hopefully--
yeah, it is slightly
frustrating obviously.
But you never know.
It could also be used to
choose which planets we went to
at some point in the future.
>>NOORY: If you had a group
of physicists, scientists,
philosophers together--
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Would they all come
up with similar theories?
>>MARTINEAU: No, I
don't think they would.
This is pretty far
out, this theory.
It's much further out than
any mainstream scientist would
probably put their name to.
They may privately wonder
whether, in fact, there
isn't some truth in it.
But it would be quite hard to
find the people in paid tenure
who'd go out there and start
talking about Venus pentagrams.
It just all gets a little--
yes, it's just not quite
their kind of thing.
>>NOORY: Biocentrism
seems to come up a lot.
Let's take a look
at what this is.
>>MARTINEAU: Yes.
>>NOORY: I'm going to
have you explain that.
>>MARTINEAU: Absolutely.
>> Reality involves
your consciousness.
We're not measuring the world.
We're creating it.
So every now and then, a
very simple but radical idea
shakes the foundations
of knowledge.
Biocentrism is turning the
world upside down again
with the seemingly simple
idea that the universe arises
from life, not the
other way around.
We think that life is just
an accident of physics.
But a long list of experiments
suggests exactly the opposite.
Amazingly, if you add life and
consciousness to the equation,
you can explain some of the
biggest puzzles in science.
So the view of the world in
which life and consciousness
are bottom line to understanding
the larger universe
is called biocentrism.
Bottom line is, and the first
principle of biocentrism
is, is that reality
involves your consciousness.
We're not measuring the world.
We're creating it.
We go through life,
we grow completely
oblivious to what's going
on around us in the world.
But experiment after
experiment shows
that not a single
particle out of the Earth
exists with real properties
until it's observed.
So it doesn't take
a genius to realize
that reality is
a process, again,
that involves consciousness.
>>NOORY: Something very
weird going on here, John,
isn't there?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
Yes, great.
Robert Lanza's book was
real eye-opener for me.
>>NOORY: It was dynamite.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah,
I really enjoyed it.
I thought it was a
great, great ride into--
>>NOORY: Good theory?
>>MARTINEAU: Yes.
I mean, the thing is
it's extreme solipsism,
it's called in philosophy,
where everything's just
occurring around you.
But at the same time,
there's a lot of truth in it.
And I think there are
some interesting points
he makes in that
book, one of which
is that you never see
these colors, shapes
and things, sounds.
They don't exist.
There is no sound
in the universe.
There are pressure waves.
But the sound
occurs in my brain.
It's my brain that makes
things happen, my mind.
So these colors that
I am looking at,
they're not out there.
The universe isn't colored.
Color is a product
of my experience.
>>NOORY: What does
this tell you, John?
What does this tell you
about the universe itself?
Give me your best guess on
what you think this all means.
>>MARTINEAU: OK.
I think what we're
looking at-- if you
put Wheeler together and
minds, putting mind first,
and maybe mix in the electric
universe people, who I think
are very interesting,
I think you're looking
at the universe as a huge mind.
It has to be a huge mind.
>>NOORY: Do you
think it's alive?
>>MARTINEAU: It's
got to be alive.
And we are very, very
important parts of it.
We are its eyes, if you like.
>>NOORY: Has it created itself?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah,
I think it probably
has and always has been.
And the use of the past tense
there, in Wheeler terms,
already gets you into trouble.
But you're looking at a huge,
wet, electrical thing that
doesn't really experience past,
present, or future, that's
always just optimizing the
best conditions for A, itself
and particularly for
its eyes, like us,
its sensory organs, which
is things like this planet.
That's why we've got all these
extraordinarily beautiful
things going on around us.
>>NOORY: Did the
universe create God?
>>MARTINEAU: It's really a--
>>NOORY: Talk about
a profound question.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
I think when we're
thinking along these lines
and examining these
questions in these ways,
we're learning more about
what God, or a god, might be.
But I prefer just to think of
the whole thing as the mind
of the universe really.
We're really getting some--
hopefully getting some insights
into the mind of the universe.
>>NOORY: Is Elon
Musk right, John?
Are we in a digital universe?
>>MARTINEAU: In a
simulation-- he's not alone.
I think Paul Davies, the
physicist Paul Davies,
is another secret believer
in that same theory.
>>NOORY: It's a weird feeling.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
I mean, it's--
>>NOORY: I hope they don't
shut off their computer on us
one day.
>>MARTINEAU: No.
I mean, obviously,
if you're Elon Musk,
the whole thing must
feel like a simulation,
because you get to be building
rockets and everything just
like you would be if you were
playing a great computer game.
Yeah, he may be right.
I mean, we just
simply don't know.
But at the same time, you
think, what is a simulation?
Is a dream a simulation?
When I have a dream,
is that a simulation?
>>NOORY: Exactly, good point.
>>MARTINEAU: It's
kind of very possible
that we are simulations in
the mind of the universe.
It's a similar way
of looking at-- all
of these different solutions
actually overlap very nicely.
>>NOORY: If you had that one
question you wanted answered,
what would the question be?
You have one question.
You're allowed just one.
You'll get the answer.
What's the question?
>>MARTINEAU: How far
to the nearest planet
with conscious observers on it?
That's what I'd like to know.
>>NOORY: With life?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah,
I'd love to know that.
>>NOORY: You want to know that?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah,
that would be my thing.
>>NOORY: Some believe
we've been visited already.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think that's
probably quite likely too.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: I would want to
ask, how did it start?
And I wonder if they
could give me the answer?
I'm not sure they could,
because they probably
don't know it either.
>>MARTINEAU: No,
no, that's right.
>>NOORY: How do people get
more information on your books
and what you do, John?
>>MARTINEAU: Well, my publishing
company is called Wooden Books.
>>NOORY: Wooden Books?
>>MARTINEAU: Wooden Books, yeah.
Our most recent book
was called "Megalith."
And you can go to
woodenbooks.com.
And this subject I'm talking
with you about today,
I'm still writing
the book actually.
I'm halfway through
chapter 2 of five chapters.
>>NOORY: Is it changing?
Do you find it evolving?
>>MARTINEAU: It's been really
helpful coming on this show
and talking it through with you.
But yeah, it is.
It is evolving.
It stopped evolving
in really big ways.
So I think with the discovery
of the TRAPPIST system,
that really--
and when I plotted the
TRAPPIST system's planets
and I saw a double Venus
spiral thing in there,
I was just like, right, this
is really, really interesting.
And the fact that
NASA think that's
where they'd send a
rocket, and all my research
would agree with it, just
purely on the geometry
and the harmony--
>>NOORY: So not
only do we believe
the planet may be alive
with the "gaia" theory,
but that the universe is alive?
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And growing.
>>MARTINEAU: Yeah, and growing.
>>NOORY: What about
the multiverse theory?
>>MARTINEAU: Well,
the multiverse theory
may or may not be true.
I mean, it arose initially out
of the theory of inflation.
And that's to do with
what happened in the Big
Bang and all the rest of it.
>>NOORY: What do you think?
>>MARTINEAU: With the
multiverse, I'm just--
>>NOORY: You're holding back.
I can tell.
>>MARTINEAU: I am
suspicious of it.
>>NOORY: You don't
think it's real.
>>MARTINEAU: I think it
defies Occam's razor.
I think it's very
nearly bad science.
It's not actually bad science.
And I think when you
start ignoring clues
to what's really going on--
and those clues, I think,
are present around this
planet of conscious observers.
And I would choose
Wheeler's approach,
plus the local version of
it, over the multiverse.
I'm not say there
isn't a multiverse.
But I would predict--
>>NOORY: But you
don't think there is.
>>MARTINEAU: I'd predict
if there is a multiverse,
I think they've all
got life in them.
They're all beautiful, perfect.
>>NOORY: Oh my god, absolutely.
>>MARTINEAU: They're
all perfected.
They've all got life in them.
I think the rule is
that this thing happens,
and it happens
beautifully every time.
>>NOORY: Are you convinced
that we are not alone?
>>MARTINEAU: How
can we be alone?
I mean, unless it's all
a simulation or whatever.
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>MARTINEAU: We can't
possibly be alone.
>>NOORY: I agree.
John, thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>MARTINEAU: George, thanks
very much for having me.
>>NOORY: Are we alone
in the universe?
John thinks we're not.
What do you think?
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]